**Jonathan Looper**

Edmond, OK -- (405) 761-2072 -- <looperjp@gmail.com>

**Summary**

I am an engineer/software developer with a specialty in geographic
information systems (GIS) and flood forecasting. My career has been
focused on using new tech to solve traditional engineering problems.
My PhD in engineering focused on using data science to improve
operational flood forecasting. My passion has always been on using
technology and I am wanting to broaden and deepen my skills in
software development.

**Experience**

----------------------- ------------ -----------------------
  **Project Engineer **   **Olsson**   **Oklahoma City, OK**
----------------------- ------------ -----------------------

*February 2016 -- Present*

**Oklahoma Turnpike Authority, Geographic Information System.** Lead
developer created web mapping portal using ArcGIS Enterprise Mapping
System. Created a custom **ASP.NET MVC** api using **C\#** and **SQL
Server** to provide JSON data and documents as pdfs.

**American Wind Energy Association, Regulatory Siting Database
Model.** Created a **SQL Server** Data Model for the American Wind
Energy Association. The data model provides a geographically linked
model to be used for wind farm regulatory siting purposes.

**Oklahoma State University, Utilities Master Plan, Oklahoma State
University / Frankfurt Short Bruza (FSB), Stillwater, OK** -- As a
subconsultant to FSB, Olsson built a Geographic Information System
(GIS), which included the Chilled Water, Steam, and Electrical
Systems. Tasks included converting existing AutoCAD drawings into GIS
layers, and populating the GIS database tables with data extracted
from the AutoCAD block attributes.

-------------------------------- --------------------------- ----------------
**Data Scientist / Engineer **   **Vieux and Associates **   **Norman, OK**
-------------------------------- --------------------------- ----------------

August 2006-- March 2015

**City of Austin, Flood Early Warning System (FEWS).** Lead data
scientist for City of Austin Flood Alert System. Implemented a
calibration **JAVA** library that uses the **differential evolution
algorithm**. The class calibrated a distributed hydrologic model that
was used for flood forecasting in the City of Austin. Responsible for
setup and calibration of ten hydrologic models that predicted flow and
stage in a real time hydrologic modeling system.

**Ameren Reservoir Inflow System Lake of the Ozarks.** Responsible for
development and setup of hydrologic/hydraulic modeling of riverine and
lake components, distributed hydrologic model calibration/validation,
unsteady flow routing releases from the USACE Harry S. Truman Dam, and
incorporation of upstream USGS stream gauge boundary conditions.
Created custom graphing package using **python, numpy, pandas, and
matplotlib.**

**Nevada Department of Transportation (NDOT) Design Storm.** I was
responsible for statistical analysis and data modeling for
establishing hyetograph and Depth-Area-Reduction Factors for statewide
NDOT transportation facilities.

**Bridge Hydraulics H&H, Oklahoma Department of Transportation
(ODOT).** Conducted H&H studies supporting state highway system bridge
designs.  HEC-RAS was used to develop water surface profiles. Assisted
design engineers in meeting state and federal project requirements
(FHWA and FEMA), designing temporary culverts for detour structures,
engineering bridge abutments and rip-rap protection, and conducting
frequency of low-chord and overtopping analysis.

**Flood Forecasting Data Assimilation System, PhD Dissertation,**
Created a **python** model to solve for distributed flood forecasting
within Brays Bayou in Houston Texas. Developed an **optimal control
python** package to adjust model states and variables within the
kinematic wave model.

**Real-time Rainfall-Runoff Monitoring, Oklahoma Department of
Transportation (ODOT)/FHWA.**  Responsible for assembly and analysis
of geospatial data for setup and model configuration of ScourCast.
This statewide system was designed for ODOT using software developed
in **JAVA** to assist in the implementation of counter-measures for
scour-critical bridges. When forecast streamflow exceeded
bridge-specific frequency-based thresholds, notifications and
web-based information were generated for engineering site review or
bridge closure.  The system operated with input from 6 radars and 100+
rain gauges to provide forecast streamflow at more than 135
scour-critical bridges across the state.

**PMP/PMF Training/Oklahoma Water Resources Board, 2014.**
Co-instructor for the Dam Safety Hydrology training course focused on
PMP/PMF development using HEC-HMS. Topics included watershed
characterization, developing the probable maximum storm hyetograph for
a particular region, understanding appropriate applications for
routing and transform methods, and using HEC-HMS computer modeling to
demonstrate hydrological principles and analysis techniques.

**City of Norman, Storm Water Master Plan (SWMP), Norman, OK** -- The
Norman SWMP identified \$82.6 million in proposed storm water projects
to be made over a 20 year program period. The SWMP included watershed
and stream assessments, hydrologic and hydraulic modeling, and
development of financial analyses for storm water funding sources. I
created watershed specific GIS datasets for land use, hydrologic soil
groups, floodplains, and impervious cover for the watershed
assessments. I also participated in the stream corridor assessment
field surveys.

**Oklahoma Conservation Commission, Lake Thunderbird Watershed
Analysis and Water Quality Evaluation, Norman, OK** -- The analysis
determined the impacts of future development within the watershed on
the lake's water quality. The Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT)
water quality model was used to estimate nutrient loading into Lake
Thunderbird. An in-lake model was then used to relate watershed
nutrient loading to lake water quality. Next, best management
practices (BMP) to reduce non-point source nutrient loading were
recommended to meet in-lake water quality standards. Dr. Looper setup
the SWAT model by converting GIS datasets (e.g. land use/cover,
digital elevation models, and soil surveys) into model parameters. He
also calibrated model parameters to accurately simulate the hydrology
of the watershed.

**Technical Skills**

Advanced

-   Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
-   Water Resources Engineering

Intermediate

-   Web Mapping Systems
-   Python

Beginner

-   C\#, SQL Server, ASP.NET
-   Java
-   C++
-   HTML, CSS, Javascript

**Education**

PhD in Civil Engineering, University of Oklahoma, 2013
MS in Civil Engineering, University of Oklahoma, 2012
BS in Civil Engineering, University of Oklahoma, 1999
